Do cats cough?
Cats do cough, but not nearly as often as other animals. It is often confused with “bringing up a hairball,” but no hairball is produced.
 
A cough is an expiratory effort that produces a sudden, noisy expulsion of air from the lungs. It is usually stimulated by an irritation or inflammation of the mucous membrane lining the trachea, bronchi, or bronchioles, and it expels some foreign material or accumulated inflammatory secretions like mucus.
 
Severe bouts of coughing may end with a retch and a cat may even bring up stomach contents, such as bile. Cats will crouch down and extend their neck when they cough.
 
It is important to distinguish coughing from asthmatic attacks. Asthmatic cats will often cough, but in an attack, most cats will breathe with an open mouth and often have a blueish or gray tongue or gums. Asthma attacks in cats are a medical emergency.
 
What causes cats to cough?
In cats, coughing is usually a sign of an inflammatory problem affecting the lower respiratory tract, especially some form of bronchitis. This inflammation is often due to an infection, particularly with viruses such as feline viral rhinotracheitis or bacteria such as 
Bordetella
.
 
Parasitic worms, especially heartworms, may be responsible for coughing and respiratory problems in some cases. Allergies of various origins may also cause coughing. Cats can cough for a variety of other reasons, including the presence of foreign material (such as inhaled grass) within the airway or irritation from inhaled liquids or gases.
 
Chest tumors can occasionally cause coughing. Coughing is not commonly associated with heart disease in cats. Coughing may accompany upper respiratory tract disease when irritation or inflammation affects the larynx or trachea, or a disease in the nose that results in excessive secretions draining into the larynx and trachea, causing irritation and coughing.
 
When does a coughing cat need veterinary attention?
It is normal for some cats to cough occasionally. If the cat is maintaining good health and the cough does not result in the production of phlegm or sputum, veterinary attention is not immediately required.
 
However, consult your veterinarian if the cough persists for more than a few days, is severe, is productive, recurs consistently, is accompanied by difficulty breathing or open mouth breathing, or if your cat appears sick or is losing weight.
 
How is the cause of a cat’s cough diagnosed?
Coughing is often associated with other signs of respiratory infection, so an extensive initial workup may not be required. However, if the cough is severe or has been present for some time, then further investigation may be needed. A thorough medical history will be important, documenting the onset of the problem and its progression, any changes in the cat's home environment, and any other signs of illness in the cat.
 
The diagnostic work-up may include chest X-rays, several types of blood tests, including heartworm testing, laboratory cultures of a wash sample from the lower respiratory tract, and endoscopic examination. Ultrasound evaluation of the heart may be necessary in some cases. Your cat may require a sedative for some of these procedures. Many of these tests will also help identify feline asthma.
 
How will the cough be treated?
Treatment depends on the diagnosis and your cat’s medical condition. Symptomatic treatment with decongestant medicines may be helpful in mild cases. If the cough is infectious, antibiotics will likely provide rapid improvement. Antibiotics will usually be prescribed for at least two weeks, if not longer. It is important to complete the full course of medication, as prescribed, or the infection may return and be more difficult to treat. Do not stop the treatment once the cat seems better.
 
If the coughing is a more chronic problem that has been present for one to two months, there may be permanent damage to the mucous membrane surfaces in the lungs such that they cannot heal. In these cases, respiratory infections may be prolonged and recurrent.
 
Targeted supplements may be helpful, which improve mucous membrane repair or act as immune stimulants. Anti-inflammatory drugs may be used to suppress inflammation, particularly if there is an allergic basis and the allergen cannot be found and removed from the cat’s environment. In the case of certain types of cancer, chemotherapy may be an option.